'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "xboxdrv-daemon " 1 2010-05-05 0.4.12 "User Commands"
.SH NAME
xboxdrv-daemon
\- A simple daemon that automatically launches xboxdrv when it detects a controller. 
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBxboxdrv\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[\fBOPTION\fR]\&... [\fBXBOXDRV ARGS\fR]\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-h\fR\*(T>, \*(T<\fB\-\-help\fR\*(T>
Display help text and exit.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-version\fR\*(T>
Print the version number and exit.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-v\fR\*(T>, \*(T<\fB\-\-verbose\fR\*(T>
Be verbose with printed output.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-a FILENAME, \-\-attach=FILENAME\fR\*(T>
Launch EXE when a new controller is connected
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-d FILENAME, \-\-detach=FILENAME\fR\*(T>
Launch EXE when a controller is detached
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-x FILENAME, \-\-xboxdrv=FILENAME\fR\*(T>
Set the location of the xboxdrv executable
.SH "RUNNING XBOXDRV VIA XBOXDRV-DAEMON"
\fBxboxdrv-daemon\fR allows you to run xboxdrv
automatically whenever you plug in a gamepad. Since
xboxdrv-daemon.py needs to know where xboxdrv is located you need
to supply the location of the xboxdrv binary manually if its not
located in \fBPATH\fR:
.PP
.nf
\*(T<% xboxdrv\-daemon \-\-xboxdrv ./xboxdrv\*(T>
.fi
.PP
You can pass arguments to xboxdrv after a double dash '--':
.PP
.nf
\*(T<% xboxdrv\-daemon \-\- \-\-buttonmap B=A,X=A,Y=A\*(T>
.fi
.PP
You can also run scripts that get started after xboxdrv is started
via:
.PP
.nf
\*(T<% xboxdrv\-daemon \e
  \-\-attach /home/juser/xboxdrv_attach \e
  \-\-detach /home/juser/xboxdrv_deatach\*(T>
.fi
.PP
This is useful in Kiosk settings, such as a media center PC, where you
might want to restart the media center to have the controller working
properly after it got attached.
.PP
Note that you lose some of the configurabilty when you launch it
automatically via the daemon, so this isn't generally recomment.
.PP
When you want configurability and automatic launching, it is recomment
that you write little startup scripts for your games, such as this:
.PP
.nf
\*(T<#!/bin/sh

# Start xboxdrv and remember its PID in the variable XBOXPID
xboxdrv \-\-trigger\-as\-button \-s &amp;
XBOXPID=$!

# Give xboxdrv a second to startup and create the device
sleep 1

# Launch your favorite game
your_favorite_game

# Kill xboxdrv and wait for it to finish
kill $XBOXPID
wait $XBOXPID

# EOF #\*(T>
.fi
.PP
That way you can individually configure every game and still not have
to worry about launching xboxdrv manually.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
xboxdrv(1)
